The International Court of
Justice has ordered Israel
to take all measures
to prevent
the commission of genocidal acts in Gaza
and to punish any public
incitement of genocide.
That provisional ruling
announced at The Hague.
A short time ago,
with the court
concluding that it has jurisdiction over
the case brought by South Africa
alleging Israel's actions in Gaza
could amount to genocide,
the court stopped short of calling
for an immediate cease fire in Israel's
war with Hamas.
It did order, however, Israel
to submit a report
within one month on what it is doing
to respond to the court's order
Israel must, in accordance
with its obligations
under the Genocide Convention
in relation to Palestinians in Gaza,
take all measures within its power
to prevent the Commission of all Acts
within the scope of Article
two of the convention, in particular, a
killing group's members of the group B
causing serious bodily or mental harm
to members of the group
Well, these provisional measures
come as the Hamas run
health ministry
in Gaza reports the death toll in Gaza
since the start of the war
has now passed
26,000 with 64,000 people injured.
It says at least 183 were killed
over the past day.
There is a lot to unpack here.
We've got Melissa Bell
connecting us from The Hague.
Jeremy Diamond is in Tel Aviv
as well as David McKenzie
in Johannesburg.
All standing by for analysis.
Melissa, let's start off with you.
We've just heard from the ICJ that
of course,
ruling that just came through
Immediate measures
it says that Israel must adhere to.
Take a seat.
What you've heard
and maybe you can hear behind me lately,
some of the pro-Palestinian protesters
listening on a big screen
who've been cheering on
is every one of those counts.
And the ruling
came from the head
of the International Court
of Justice here in The Hague.
It was just short of a cease fire,
of course, that the ruling went.
And, yes,
significantly further towards it
than any of us had imagined
when these proceedings began.
We listened on the 10th
and 11th of January
to South Africa
and then Israel lay out their case.
And what we just heard today
was the head of the ICJ essentially
go extremely far
in the direction of South Africa,
conceding that it was because
of all the genocidal acts
were being committed,
urging Israel
to take image urgent measures
to ensure
that there are no further
killings of Palestinians in Gaza.
A group, by the way,
that the court recognizes
as a protected people
nor the further
causing of any mental or bodily
harm to them.
Now that is short of a cease fire,
but very close to it.
And I think this is a ruling
that Israel is now
going to have to respond to.
It had been said the fact
that it were chosen
to represent themselves
as robustly as they did,
an indication of how seriously they took
this court and its rulings and no doubt
what the wider world will consider
as it takes in these proceedings. So
an order that I think
will now see a great deal
of pressure on Israel,
certainly to allow more access to Gaza
and probably
to alter the way in which it is
perhaps
going about its military operation
or certainly the transparency
with which is going about in the wake
of this,
the UN's highest court, such
that it will be a very difficult
ruling for Israel to ignore
Melissa Bell there for us at The Hague.
And we can see those protesters as well.
We've also got Jeremy
Diamond standing by in Tel Aviv.
And in fact,
we've just heard from
Netanyahu, from Benjamin
Netanyahu, hailing
the ICJ ruling
as what he says a rejection
of discrimination against Israel
Yeah, the Israeli prime minister
in his comments
making clear that Israel's commitment
to international law, in
his words, is unwavering
and also making clear that Israel
is not going to stop its war in Gaza.
Talking about the fact
that Israel will continue
to defend itself against Hamas,
which he calls
a genocidal terror organization.
But what he is also distinguishing
in this video message
is that the war in Gaza is against Hamas
and not against Palestinian civilians.
And he is also making
note of the fact that Israel
will, quote, continue
to facilitate
humanitarian assistance
to Palestinian civilians
and continue its efforts to minimize harm
as it continues
its military operations in Gaza.
But we're getting some far stronger
reaction, perhaps from Israel's
defense minister,
who is making clear that
those who seek justice,
he says, will not find it
in the leather chairs
of the court chambers in The Hague,
slamming the Hague's decision
not to reject
South Africa's
petition outright
to allow this case to proceed.
I think
now one of the real questions is to
what extent is Israel going to actually
abide by the terms
of this provisional
reading ruling and to what extent
will they actually compiled this report
that the court has demanded of Israel
within the next month?
I think it's clear
that Israel
has decided
to kind of play along with this court
up until now, has chosen
to defend itself
quite arduously in these proceedings.
But now as it relates to specific actions
on the ground,
to what extent will
Israel actually move forward with those
to to another extent,
it's important
to note
that this ruling obviously didn't
go as far as South Africa
wanted, as far as Israel feared
it would in terms of calling
for an outright cease fire in this war.
That has not happened here.
And because of that, there's certainly
a significant sigh of relief
among senior Israeli officials
as they look at this ruling,
even though this court very much laid out
the disastrous humanitarian
conditions in Gaza, gave some
credence to
the claims of
South Africa,
while it made clear that it wasn't
ruling on the merits of the case.
It certainly can
continue to soil Israel's
international reputation,
but it doesn't go as far as calling
for an outright cessation of hostilities
which could have potentially
put Israel in the position
of defying a binding
ruling by this court.
All right.
We've got David McKenzie
in Johannesburg as well.
And David,
we also heard from
the minister of international relations
naledi, Pandor, outside
the court today and to Jeremy's points.
Yes, the
you know,
the wording in terms
of the ceasing of fire
off of the the military action
right now wasn't in this
ruling by the ICJ.
But what naledi pandor,
interestingly, said
that if Israel is going to abide by
what was put out in court today,
that a cessation would have to occur
Well, I think
what's important here to note
is that this is a matter that isn't over.
As Jeremy mentioned,
Israel was required
to give a report in about a month
about how it is going
towards meeting those requests,
those binding
requests of the court
to avoid what the court says
may at some point amount to genocide
as it does
its investigation
into the horrible circumstances in Gaza.
So from the South African perspective,
they will be hoping for the pressure
to be piled on
to try
and improve
the conditions of the people in Gaza.
It was very telling that
when someone asked
Naledi Pandor,
the Minister of International Relations
and cooperation
on the steps of the court, you know,
what does this say about South
Africa and Israel?
She said, well,
this is about the Palestinian people.
And as you know, Elena,
the ruling party here
has had a long affinity
to the Palestinian cause
all the way back to and before
Nelson Mandela.
This is a consistent
policy stance
by the South African government.
And they've put the money
where their mouth is, as it were.
She said they couldn't stand idly
by while these alleged
atrocities happened.
And now they are going to continue
this case in the months
and potentially years ahead.
I think an important thing
to note as well.
South
Africa says that it wants to pursue
this case also to try and
make a statement about
bodies like the U.N.
Security Council not being effective in
trying to push global cooperation.
They said
this venue may be a way to do it.
Take a listen.
The member states of the United Nations
must oversee the process and ensure
that we create a basis
for a global community
in which a resort to arms
is no longer easily a resort to abuse.
It's no longer easy and that more effort
is now
directed toward negotiation
and towards seeking peaceful means
of ending conflict.
She did allude to powerful
friends of Israel,
and you can read the US
and that to perhaps persuade
Israel
behind the scenes
to change how they are configured
pursuing this war
against Hamas
in the coming weeks
to avoid possible censure
in the coming months from this court.
Of course, Israel has repeatedly denied
that it is doing anything
in the theater of war.
In fact,
they've said that they have tried
to protect civilians
and provide humanitarian aid.
It will be
really important to see
whether the behavior of Israel
or the sense of how
they are
working towards these judgments
or at least rulings by the court
play out in the coming days.